README.md, before:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- x-hide-in-docs-start -->
<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/open-feature/community/0e23508c163a6a1ac8c0ced3e4bd78faafe627c7/assets/logo/horizontal/white/openfeature-horizontal-white.svg" />
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/open-feature/community/0e23508c163a6a1ac8c0ced3e4bd78faafe627c7/assets/logo/horizontal/black/openfeature-horizontal-black.svg" />
    <img align="center" alt="OpenFeature Logo">
  </picture>
</p>

<h2 align="center">OpenFeature Java SDK</h2>

<!-- x-hide-in-docs-end -->
<!-- The 'github-badges' class is used in the docs -->
<p align="center" class="github-badges">
  <a href="https://github.com/open-feature/spec/releases/tag/v0.7.0">
    <img alt="Specification" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=specification&message=v0.7.0&color=yellow&style=for-the-badge" />
  </a>
  <!-- x-release-please-start-version -->

  <a href="https://github.com/open-feature/java-sdk/releases/tag/v1.7.5">
    <img alt="Release" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=release&message=v1.7.5&color=blue&style=for-the-badge" />
  </a>  

  <!-- x-release-please-end -->
  <br/>
  <a href="https://javadoc.io/doc/dev.openfeature/sdk">
    <img alt="Javadoc" src="https://javadoc.io/badge2/dev.openfeature/sdk/javadoc.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/dev.openfeature/sdk">
    <img alt="Maven Central" src="https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/dev.openfeature/sdk/badge.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://codecov.io/gh/open-feature/java-sdk">
    <img alt="Codecov" src="https://codecov.io/gh/open-feature/java-sdk/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=XMS9L7PBY1" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/6241">
    <img alt="CII Best Practices" src="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/6241/badge" />
  </a>
</p>
<!-- x-hide-in-docs-start -->

[OpenFeature](https://openfeature.dev) is an open specification that provides a vendor-agnostic, community-driven API for feature flagging that works with your favorite feature flag management tool.

<!-- x-hide-in-docs-end -->
## 🚀 Quick start

### Requirements

- Java 8+ (compiler target is 1.8)

Note that this library is intended to be used in server-side contexts and has not been evaluated for use in mobile devices.

### Install

#### Maven

<!-- x-release-please-start-version -->
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>dev.openfeature</groupId>
    <artifactId>sdk</artifactId>
    <version>1.7.5</version>
</dependency>
```
<!-- x-release-please-end-version -->

If you would like snapshot builds, this is the relevant repository information:

```xml
<repositories>
    <repository>
        <snapshots>
            <enabled>true</enabled>
        </snapshots>
        <id>sonartype</id>
        <name>Sonartype Repository</name>
        <url>https://s01.oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots/</url>
    </repository>
</repositories>
```

#### Gradle

<!-- x-release-please-start-version -->
```groovy
dependencies {
    implementation 'dev.openfeature:sdk:1.7.5'
}
```
<!-- x-release-please-end-version -->

### Usage

```java
public void example(){

    // flags defined in memory
    Map<String, Flag<?>> myFlags = new HashMap<>();
    myFlags.put("v2_enabled", Flag.builder()
        .variant("on", true)
        .variant("off", false)
        .defaultVariant("on")
        .build());

    // configure a provider
    OpenFeatureAPI api = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance();
    api.setProviderAndWait(new InMemoryProvider(myFlags));

    // create a client
    Client client = api.getClient();

    // get a bool flag value
    boolean flagValue = client.getBooleanValue("v2_enabled", false);
}
```

### API Reference

See [here](https://javadoc.io/doc/dev.openfeature/sdk/latest/) for the Javadocs.

## 🌟 Features

| Status | Features                        | Description                                                                                                                        |
| ------ | ------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| ✅     | [Providers](#providers)         | Integrate with a commercial, open source, or in-house feature management tool.                                                     |
| ✅     | [Targeting](#targeting)         | Contextually-aware flag evaluation using [evaluation context](https://openfeature.dev/docs/reference/concepts/evaluation-context). |
| ✅     | [Hooks](#hooks)                 | Add functionality to various stages of the flag evaluation life-cycle.                                                             |
| ✅     | [Logging](#logging)             | Integrate with popular logging packages.                                                                                           |
| ✅     | [Named clients](#named-clients) | Utilize multiple providers in a single application.                                                                                |
| ✅     | [Eventing](#eventing)           | React to state changes in the provider or flag management system.                                                                  |
| ✅     | [Shutdown](#shutdown)           | Gracefully clean up a provider during application shutdown.                                                                        |
| ✅     | [Extending](#extending)         | Extend OpenFeature with custom providers and hooks.                                                                                |

<sub>Implemented: ✅ | In-progress: ⚠️ | Not implemented yet: ❌</sub>

### Providers

[Providers](https://openfeature.dev/docs/reference/concepts/provider) are an abstraction between a flag management system and the OpenFeature SDK.
Look [here](https://openfeature.dev/ecosystem?instant_search%5BrefinementList%5D%5Btype%5D%5B0%5D=Provider&instant_search%5BrefinementList%5D%5Btechnology%5D%5B0%5D=Java) for a complete list of available providers.
If the provider you're looking for hasn't been created yet, see the [develop a provider](#develop-a-provider) section to learn how to build it yourself.

Once you've added a provider as a dependency, it can be registered with OpenFeature like this:
   
#### Synchronous  
  
To register a provider in a blocking manner to ensure it is ready before further actions are taken, you can use the `setProviderAndWait` method as shown below:     
  
```java
    OpenFeatureAPI api = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance();
    api.setProviderAndWait(new MyProvider());
```  
  
#### Asynchronous    

To register a provider in a non-blocking manner, you can use the `setProvider` method as shown below:  

```java
    OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().setProvider(new MyProvider());
```    

In some situations, it may be beneficial to register multiple providers in the same application.
This is possible using [named clients](#named-clients), which is covered in more details below.

### Targeting

Sometimes, the value of a flag must consider some dynamic criteria about the application or user, such as the user's location, IP, email address, or the server's location.
In OpenFeature, we refer to this as [targeting](https://openfeature.dev/specification/glossary#targeting).
If the flag management system you're using supports targeting, you can provide the input data using the [evaluation context](https://openfeature.dev/docs/reference/concepts/evaluation-context).

```java
// set a value to the global context
OpenFeatureAPI api = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance();
Map<String, Value> apiAttrs = new HashMap<>();
apiAttrs.put("region", new Value(System.getEnv("us-east-1")));
EvaluationContext apiCtx = new ImmutableContext(apiAttrs);
api.setEvaluationContext(apiCtx);

// set a value to the client context
Map<String, Value> clientAttrs = new HashMap<>();
clientAttrs.put("region", new Value(System.getEnv("us-east-1")));
EvaluationContext clientCtx = new ImmutableContext(clientAttrs);
Client client = api.getInstance().getClient();
client.setEvaluationContext(clientCtx);

// set a value to the invocation context
Map<String, Value> requestAttrs = new HashMap<>();
requestAttrs.put("email", new Value(session.getAttribute("email")));
requestAttrs.put("product", new Value("productId"));
String targetingKey = session.getId();
EvaluationContext reqCtx = new ImmutableContext(targetingKey, requestAttrs);

boolean flagValue = client.getBooleanValue("some-flag", false, reqCtx);
```

### Hooks

[Hooks](https://openfeature.dev/docs/reference/concepts/hooks) allow for custom logic to be added at well-defined points of the flag evaluation life-cycle
Look [here](https://openfeature.dev/ecosystem?instant_search%5BrefinementList%5D%5Btype%5D%5B0%5D=Hook&instant_search%5BrefinementList%5D%5Btechnology%5D%5B0%5D=Java) for a complete list of available hooks.
If the hook you're looking for hasn't been created yet, see the [develop a hook](#develop-a-hook) section to learn how to build it yourself.

Once you've added a hook as a dependency, it can be registered at the global, client, or flag invocation level.

```java
  // add a hook globally, to run on all evaluations
  OpenFeatureAPI api = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance();
  api.addHooks(new ExampleHook());
  
  // add a hook on this client, to run on all evaluations made by this client
  Client client = api.getClient();        
  client.addHooks(new ExampleHook());
  
  // add a hook for this evaluation only
  Boolean retval = client.getBooleanValue(flagKey, false, null,
          FlagEvaluationOptions.builder().hook(new ExampleHook()).build());
```

### Logging

The Java SDK uses SLF4J. See the [SLF4J manual](https://slf4j.org/manual.html) for complete documentation.

### Named clients

Clients can be given a name.
A name is a logical identifier which can be used to associate clients with a particular provider.
If a name has no associated provider, the global provider is used.  

```java
FeatureProvider scopedProvider = new MyProvider();

// registering the default provider
OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().setProvider(LocalProvider());
// registering a named provider
OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().setProvider("clientForCache", new CachedProvider());

// a client backed by default provider
Client clientDefault = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().getClient();
// a client backed by CachedProvider
Client clientNamed = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().getClient("clientForCache");
```

Named providers can be set in a blocking or non-blocking way. 
For more details, please refer to the [providers](#providers) section.  

### Eventing

Events allow you to react to state changes in the provider or underlying flag management system, such as flag definition changes, provider readiness, or error conditions.
Initialization events (`PROVIDER_READY` on success, `PROVIDER_ERROR` on failure) are dispatched for every provider.
Some providers support additional events, such as `PROVIDER_CONFIGURATION_CHANGED`.

Please refer to the documentation of the provider you're using to see what events are supported.

```java
// add an event handler to a client
Client client = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().getClient();
client.onProviderConfigurationChanged((EventDetails eventDetails) -> {
    // do something when the provider's flag settings change
});

// add an event handler to the global API
OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().onProviderStale((EventDetails eventDetails) -> {
    // do something when the provider's cache goes stale
});
```

### Shutdown

The OpenFeature API provides a close function to perform a cleanup of all registered providers.
This should only be called when your application is in the process of shutting down.

```java
// shut down all providers
OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().shutdown();
```

## Extending

### Develop a provider

To develop a provider, you need to create a new project and include the OpenFeature SDK as a dependency.
This can be a new repository or included in [the existing contrib repository](https://github.com/open-feature/java-sdk-contrib) available under the OpenFeature organization.
You’ll then need to write the provider by implementing the `FeatureProvider` interface exported by the OpenFeature SDK.

```java
public class MyProvider implements FeatureProvider {
    @Override
    public Metadata getMetadata() {
        return () -> "My Provider";
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderState getState() {
        // optionally indicate your provider's state (assumed to be READY if not implemented)
    }

    @Override
    public void initialize(EvaluationContext evaluationContext) throws Exception {
        // start up your provider
    }

    @Override
    public void shutdown() {
        // shut down your provider
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<Boolean> getBooleanEvaluation(String key, Boolean defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve a boolean flag value
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<String> getStringEvaluation(String key, String defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve a string flag value
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<Integer> getIntegerEvaluation(String key, Integer defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve an int flag value
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<Double> getDoubleEvaluation(String key, Double defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve a double flag value
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<Value> getObjectEvaluation(String key, Value defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve an object flag value
    }
}
```

If you'd like your provider to support firing events, such as events for when flags are changed in the flag management system, extend `EventProvider`.

```java
class MyEventProvider extends EventProvider {
    @Override
    public Metadata getMetadata() {
        return () -> "My Event Provider";
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderState getState() {
        // indicate your provider's state (required for EventProviders)
    }

    @Override
    public void initialize(EvaluationContext evaluationContext) throws Exception {
        // emit events when flags are changed in a hypothetical REST API
        this.restApiClient.onFlagsChanged(() -> {
            ProviderEventDetails details = ProviderEventDetails.builder().message("flags changed in API!").build();
            this.emitProviderConfigurationChanged(details);
        });
    }

    @Override
    public void shutdown() {
        // shut down your provider
    }

    // remaining provider methods...
}
```

> Built a new provider? [Let us know](https://github.com/open-feature/openfeature.dev/issues/new?assignees=&labels=provider&projects=&template=document-provider.yaml&title=%5BProvider%5D%3A+) so we can add it to the docs!

### Develop a hook

To develop a hook, you need to create a new project and include the OpenFeature SDK as a dependency.
This can be a new repository or included in [the existing contrib repository](https://github.com/open-feature/java-sdk-contrib) available under the OpenFeature organization.
Implement your own hook by conforming to the `Hook interface`.
To satisfy the interface, all methods (`Before`/`After`/`Finally`/`Error`) need to be defined.
To avoid defining empty functions make use of the `UnimplementedHook` struct (which already implements all the empty functions).

```java
class MyHook implements Hook {

    @Override
    public Optional before(HookContext ctx, Map hints) {
        // code that runs before the flag evaluation
    }

    @Override
    public void after(HookContext ctx, FlagEvaluationDetails details, Map hints) {
        // code that runs after the flag evaluation succeeds
    }

    @Override
    public void error(HookContext ctx, Exception error, Map hints) {
        // code that runs when there's an error during a flag evaluation
    }

    @Override
    public void finallyAfter(HookContext ctx, Map hints) {
        // code that runs regardless of success or error
    }
};
```

> Built a new hook? [Let us know](https://github.com/open-feature/openfeature.dev/issues/new?assignees=&labels=hook&projects=&template=document-hook.yaml&title=%5BHook%5D%3A+) so we can add it to the docs!

<!-- x-hide-in-docs-start -->
## ⭐️ Support the project

- Give this repo a ⭐️!
- Follow us on social media:
  - Twitter: [@openfeature](https://twitter.com/openfeature)
  - LinkedIn: [OpenFeature](https://www.linkedin.com/company/openfeature/)
- Join us on [Slack](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C0344AANLA1)
- For more, check out our [community page](https://openfeature.dev/community/)

## 🤝 Contributing

Interested in contributing? Great, we'd love your help! To get started, take a look at the [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md) guide.

### Thanks to everyone that has already contributed

<a href="https://github.com/open-feature/java-sdk/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=open-feature/java-sdk" alt="Pictures of the folks who have contributed to the project" />
</a>

Made with [contrib.rocks](https://contrib.rocks).
<!-- x-hide-in-docs-end -->

Commit message:

feat: context propagation
Signed-off-by: Sviatoslav Sharaev <sviatoslav.sharaev@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
<!-- x-hide-in-docs-start -->
<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/open-feature/community/0e23508c163a6a1ac8c0ced3e4bd78faafe627c7/assets/logo/horizontal/white/openfeature-horizontal-white.svg" />
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: light)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/open-feature/community/0e23508c163a6a1ac8c0ced3e4bd78faafe627c7/assets/logo/horizontal/black/openfeature-horizontal-black.svg" />
    <img align="center" alt="OpenFeature Logo">
  </picture>
</p>

<h2 align="center">OpenFeature Java SDK</h2>

<!-- x-hide-in-docs-end -->
<!-- The 'github-badges' class is used in the docs -->
<p align="center" class="github-badges">
  <a href="https://github.com/open-feature/spec/releases/tag/v0.7.0">
    <img alt="Specification" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=specification&message=v0.7.0&color=yellow&style=for-the-badge" />
  </a>
  <!-- x-release-please-start-version -->

  <a href="https://github.com/open-feature/java-sdk/releases/tag/v1.7.5">
    <img alt="Release" src="https://img.shields.io/static/v1?label=release&message=v1.7.5&color=blue&style=for-the-badge" />
  </a>  

  <!-- x-release-please-end -->
  <br/>
  <a href="https://javadoc.io/doc/dev.openfeature/sdk">
    <img alt="Javadoc" src="https://javadoc.io/badge2/dev.openfeature/sdk/javadoc.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/dev.openfeature/sdk">
    <img alt="Maven Central" src="https://maven-badges.herokuapp.com/maven-central/dev.openfeature/sdk/badge.svg" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://codecov.io/gh/open-feature/java-sdk">
    <img alt="Codecov" src="https://codecov.io/gh/open-feature/java-sdk/branch/main/graph/badge.svg?token=XMS9L7PBY1" />
  </a>
  <a href="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/6241">
    <img alt="CII Best Practices" src="https://bestpractices.coreinfrastructure.org/projects/6241/badge" />
  </a>
</p>
<!-- x-hide-in-docs-start -->

[OpenFeature](https://openfeature.dev) is an open specification that provides a vendor-agnostic, community-driven API for feature flagging that works with your favorite feature flag management tool.

<!-- x-hide-in-docs-end -->
## 🚀 Quick start

### Requirements

- Java 8+ (compiler target is 1.8)

Note that this library is intended to be used in server-side contexts and has not been evaluated for use in mobile devices.

### Install

#### Maven

<!-- x-release-please-start-version -->
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>dev.openfeature</groupId>
    <artifactId>sdk</artifactId>
    <version>1.7.5</version>
</dependency>
```
<!-- x-release-please-end-version -->

If you would like snapshot builds, this is the relevant repository information:

```xml
<repositories>
    <repository>
        <snapshots>
            <enabled>true</enabled>
        </snapshots>
        <id>sonartype</id>
        <name>Sonartype Repository</name>
        <url>https://s01.oss.sonatype.org/content/repositories/snapshots/</url>
    </repository>
</repositories>
```

#### Gradle

<!-- x-release-please-start-version -->
```groovy
dependencies {
    implementation 'dev.openfeature:sdk:1.7.5'
}
```
<!-- x-release-please-end-version -->

### Usage

```java
public void example(){

    // flags defined in memory
    Map<String, Flag<?>> myFlags = new HashMap<>();
    myFlags.put("v2_enabled", Flag.builder()
        .variant("on", true)
        .variant("off", false)
        .defaultVariant("on")
        .build());

    // configure a provider
    OpenFeatureAPI api = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance();
    api.setProviderAndWait(new InMemoryProvider(myFlags));

    // create a client
    Client client = api.getClient();

    // get a bool flag value
    boolean flagValue = client.getBooleanValue("v2_enabled", false);
}
```

### API Reference

See [here](https://javadoc.io/doc/dev.openfeature/sdk/latest/) for the Javadocs.

## 🌟 Features

| Status | Features                                                              | Description                                                                                                                                                   |
| ------ |-----------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ✅     | [Providers](#providers)                                               | Integrate with a commercial, open source, or in-house feature management tool.                                                                                |
| ✅     | [Targeting](#targeting)                                               | Contextually-aware flag evaluation using [evaluation context](https://openfeature.dev/docs/reference/concepts/evaluation-context).                            |
| ✅     | [Hooks](#hooks)                                                       | Add functionality to various stages of the flag evaluation life-cycle.                                                                                        |
| ✅     | [Logging](#logging)                                                   | Integrate with popular logging packages.                                                                                                                      |
| ✅     | [Named clients](#named-clients)                                       | Utilize multiple providers in a single application.                                                                                                           |
| ✅     | [Eventing](#eventing)                                                 | React to state changes in the provider or flag management system.                                                                                             |
| ✅     | [Shutdown](#shutdown)                                                 | Gracefully clean up a provider during application shutdown.                                                                                                   |
| ✅     | [Transaction Context Propagation](#transaction-context-propagation)   | Set a specific [evaluation context](https://openfeature.dev/docs/reference/concepts/evaluation-context) for a transaction (e.g. an HTTP request or a thread). |   
| ✅     | [Extending](#extending)                                               | Extend OpenFeature with custom providers and hooks.                                                                                                           |

<sub>Implemented: ✅ | In-progress: ⚠️ | Not implemented yet: ❌</sub>

### Providers

[Providers](https://openfeature.dev/docs/reference/concepts/provider) are an abstraction between a flag management system and the OpenFeature SDK.
Look [here](https://openfeature.dev/ecosystem?instant_search%5BrefinementList%5D%5Btype%5D%5B0%5D=Provider&instant_search%5BrefinementList%5D%5Btechnology%5D%5B0%5D=Java) for a complete list of available providers.
If the provider you're looking for hasn't been created yet, see the [develop a provider](#develop-a-provider) section to learn how to build it yourself.

Once you've added a provider as a dependency, it can be registered with OpenFeature like this:
   
#### Synchronous  
  
To register a provider in a blocking manner to ensure it is ready before further actions are taken, you can use the `setProviderAndWait` method as shown below:     
  
```java
    OpenFeatureAPI api = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance();
    api.setProviderAndWait(new MyProvider());
```  
  
#### Asynchronous    

To register a provider in a non-blocking manner, you can use the `setProvider` method as shown below:  

```java
    OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().setProvider(new MyProvider());
```    

In some situations, it may be beneficial to register multiple providers in the same application.
This is possible using [named clients](#named-clients), which is covered in more details below.

### Targeting

Sometimes, the value of a flag must consider some dynamic criteria about the application or user, such as the user's location, IP, email address, or the server's location.
In OpenFeature, we refer to this as [targeting](https://openfeature.dev/specification/glossary#targeting).
If the flag management system you're using supports targeting, you can provide the input data using the [evaluation context](https://openfeature.dev/docs/reference/concepts/evaluation-context).

```java
// set a value to the global context
OpenFeatureAPI api = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance();
Map<String, Value> apiAttrs = new HashMap<>();
apiAttrs.put("region", new Value(System.getEnv("us-east-1")));
EvaluationContext apiCtx = new ImmutableContext(apiAttrs);
api.setEvaluationContext(apiCtx);

// set a value to the client context
Map<String, Value> clientAttrs = new HashMap<>();
clientAttrs.put("region", new Value(System.getEnv("us-east-1")));
EvaluationContext clientCtx = new ImmutableContext(clientAttrs);
Client client = api.getInstance().getClient();
client.setEvaluationContext(clientCtx);

// set a value to the invocation context
Map<String, Value> requestAttrs = new HashMap<>();
requestAttrs.put("email", new Value(session.getAttribute("email")));
requestAttrs.put("product", new Value("productId"));
String targetingKey = session.getId();
EvaluationContext reqCtx = new ImmutableContext(targetingKey, requestAttrs);

boolean flagValue = client.getBooleanValue("some-flag", false, reqCtx);
```

### Hooks

[Hooks](https://openfeature.dev/docs/reference/concepts/hooks) allow for custom logic to be added at well-defined points of the flag evaluation life-cycle
Look [here](https://openfeature.dev/ecosystem?instant_search%5BrefinementList%5D%5Btype%5D%5B0%5D=Hook&instant_search%5BrefinementList%5D%5Btechnology%5D%5B0%5D=Java) for a complete list of available hooks.
If the hook you're looking for hasn't been created yet, see the [develop a hook](#develop-a-hook) section to learn how to build it yourself.

Once you've added a hook as a dependency, it can be registered at the global, client, or flag invocation level.

```java
  // add a hook globally, to run on all evaluations
  OpenFeatureAPI api = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance();
  api.addHooks(new ExampleHook());
  
  // add a hook on this client, to run on all evaluations made by this client
  Client client = api.getClient();        
  client.addHooks(new ExampleHook());
  
  // add a hook for this evaluation only
  Boolean retval = client.getBooleanValue(flagKey, false, null,
          FlagEvaluationOptions.builder().hook(new ExampleHook()).build());
```

### Logging

The Java SDK uses SLF4J. See the [SLF4J manual](https://slf4j.org/manual.html) for complete documentation.

### Named clients

Clients can be given a name.
A name is a logical identifier which can be used to associate clients with a particular provider.
If a name has no associated provider, the global provider is used.  

```java
FeatureProvider scopedProvider = new MyProvider();

// registering the default provider
OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().setProvider(LocalProvider());
// registering a named provider
OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().setProvider("clientForCache", new CachedProvider());

// a client backed by default provider
Client clientDefault = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().getClient();
// a client backed by CachedProvider
Client clientNamed = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().getClient("clientForCache");
```

Named providers can be set in a blocking or non-blocking way. 
For more details, please refer to the [providers](#providers) section.  

### Eventing

Events allow you to react to state changes in the provider or underlying flag management system, such as flag definition changes, provider readiness, or error conditions.
Initialization events (`PROVIDER_READY` on success, `PROVIDER_ERROR` on failure) are dispatched for every provider.
Some providers support additional events, such as `PROVIDER_CONFIGURATION_CHANGED`.

Please refer to the documentation of the provider you're using to see what events are supported.

```java
// add an event handler to a client
Client client = OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().getClient();
client.onProviderConfigurationChanged((EventDetails eventDetails) -> {
    // do something when the provider's flag settings change
});

// add an event handler to the global API
OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().onProviderStale((EventDetails eventDetails) -> {
    // do something when the provider's cache goes stale
});
```

### Shutdown

The OpenFeature API provides a close function to perform a cleanup of all registered providers.
This should only be called when your application is in the process of shutting down.

```java
// shut down all providers
OpenFeatureAPI.getInstance().shutdown();
```

## Extending

### Develop a provider

To develop a provider, you need to create a new project and include the OpenFeature SDK as a dependency.
This can be a new repository or included in [the existing contrib repository](https://github.com/open-feature/java-sdk-contrib) available under the OpenFeature organization.
You’ll then need to write the provider by implementing the `FeatureProvider` interface exported by the OpenFeature SDK.

```java
public class MyProvider implements FeatureProvider {
    @Override
    public Metadata getMetadata() {
        return () -> "My Provider";
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderState getState() {
        // optionally indicate your provider's state (assumed to be READY if not implemented)
    }

    @Override
    public void initialize(EvaluationContext evaluationContext) throws Exception {
        // start up your provider
    }

    @Override
    public void shutdown() {
        // shut down your provider
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<Boolean> getBooleanEvaluation(String key, Boolean defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve a boolean flag value
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<String> getStringEvaluation(String key, String defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve a string flag value
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<Integer> getIntegerEvaluation(String key, Integer defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve an int flag value
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<Double> getDoubleEvaluation(String key, Double defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve a double flag value
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderEvaluation<Value> getObjectEvaluation(String key, Value defaultValue, EvaluationContext ctx) {
        // resolve an object flag value
    }
}
```

If you'd like your provider to support firing events, such as events for when flags are changed in the flag management system, extend `EventProvider`.

```java
class MyEventProvider extends EventProvider {
    @Override
    public Metadata getMetadata() {
        return () -> "My Event Provider";
    }

    @Override
    public ProviderState getState() {
        // indicate your provider's state (required for EventProviders)
    }

    @Override
    public void initialize(EvaluationContext evaluationContext) throws Exception {
        // emit events when flags are changed in a hypothetical REST API
        this.restApiClient.onFlagsChanged(() -> {
            ProviderEventDetails details = ProviderEventDetails.builder().message("flags changed in API!").build();
            this.emitProviderConfigurationChanged(details);
        });
    }

    @Override
    public void shutdown() {
        // shut down your provider
    }

    // remaining provider methods...
}
```

> Built a new provider? [Let us know](https://github.com/open-feature/openfeature.dev/issues/new?assignees=&labels=provider&projects=&template=document-provider.yaml&title=%5BProvider%5D%3A+) so we can add it to the docs!

### Develop a hook

To develop a hook, you need to create a new project and include the OpenFeature SDK as a dependency.
This can be a new repository or included in [the existing contrib repository](https://github.com/open-feature/java-sdk-contrib) available under the OpenFeature organization.
Implement your own hook by conforming to the `Hook interface`.
To satisfy the interface, all methods (`Before`/`After`/`Finally`/`Error`) need to be defined.
To avoid defining empty functions make use of the `UnimplementedHook` struct (which already implements all the empty functions).

```java
class MyHook implements Hook {

    @Override
    public Optional before(HookContext ctx, Map hints) {
        // code that runs before the flag evaluation
    }

    @Override
    public void after(HookContext ctx, FlagEvaluationDetails details, Map hints) {
        // code that runs after the flag evaluation succeeds
    }

    @Override
    public void error(HookContext ctx, Exception error, Map hints) {
        // code that runs when there's an error during a flag evaluation
    }

    @Override
    public void finallyAfter(HookContext ctx, Map hints) {
        // code that runs regardless of success or error
    }
};
```

> Built a new hook? [Let us know](https://github.com/open-feature/openfeature.dev/issues/new?assignees=&labels=hook&projects=&template=document-hook.yaml&title=%5BHook%5D%3A+) so we can add it to the docs!

<!-- x-hide-in-docs-start -->
## ⭐️ Support the project

- Give this repo a ⭐️!
- Follow us on social media:
  - Twitter: [@openfeature](https://twitter.com/openfeature)
  - LinkedIn: [OpenFeature](https://www.linkedin.com/company/openfeature/)
- Join us on [Slack](https://cloud-native.slack.com/archives/C0344AANLA1)
- For more, check out our [community page](https://openfeature.dev/community/)

## 🤝 Contributing

Interested in contributing? Great, we'd love your help! To get started, take a look at the [CONTRIBUTING](CONTRIBUTING.md) guide.

### Thanks to everyone that has already contributed

<a href="https://github.com/open-feature/java-sdk/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=open-feature/java-sdk" alt="Pictures of the folks who have contributed to the project" />
</a>

Made with [contrib.rocks](https://contrib.rocks).
<!-- x-hide-in-docs-end -->
